## PM2

https://github.com/Unitech/pm2

PM2 is a cluster management solution.

_PM2 abstracts the native cluster module logic entirely. It lets you write a simple, single-threaded codebase and then run it globally using all CPU cores._

> ### Installation
> ```
> npm install -g pm2
> ```
---
> ### Usage
> 
> _Usually, we SSH into the machine running the PM2 and
> execute these commands._
> 
> This command runs your single-threaded 
> app across all CPU cores instantly.
> ```
> pm2 start app.js -i max
> ```
---
> ### Restart all instances
> 
> ```
> pm2 restart 
> ```
>
> _PM2 terminates all application processes simultaneously, causing immediate downtime._
---

&nbsp;
## Zero-downtime while rolling out an Update
_When deploying an update(New Features) to our application, we use the **pm2 reload** command._

_A reload achieves zero downtime by maintaining a rolling cycle: it kills and updates one worker process at a time while the remaining workers continue to actively handle incoming network traffic._

_**This is called a rolling reload and is initiated using the command `pm2 reload`.**_

&nbsp;
### Rolling reload setup:

> Create a file named `ecosystem.config.js` in your root project directory. 
> 
> _PM2 manages our processes using this code._
> ```javascript
> module.exports = {
>   apps: [{
>     name: 'my-production-api',
>     script: './server.js',
>     
>     // 1. Run in cluster mode
>     instances: 'max', // Use all CPU cores.
>     exec_mode: 'cluster',
>     
>     // 2. Zero-Downtime Optimizations
>     // Instruct PM2 to wait for your 
>     // app to send a 'ready' signal.
>     wait_ready: true, 
>     
>     
>     // Max time (ms) PM2 waits for the 
>     // signal before forcing it online.
>     // `ready`
>     listen_timeout: 10000, 
>     
>     // Time given to old workers to 
>     // gracefully finish active requests.
>     // `SIGINT`
>     kill_timeout: 4000,
>
>     // Mitigate memory leaks by auto 
>     // restarting at 500 Megabytes.
>     max_memory_restart: "500M" 
>   }]
> };
> ```
>
> _Some code is also required, which listens to the command sent by PM2. That code part is explained in the following section to ease the understanding of the flow._
>

### Rolling reload flow:

0. Run this command:
    ```
    pm2 reload ecosystem.config.js

    OR

    pm2 reload my-app-name
    
    ```

1. ***PM2 then sends a shutdown command (`SIGINT`) to Worker 1.***

    It tells the Worker 1 to shutdown **gracefully**.

    _PM2 sends this command only to Worker 1 first so that only that worker would be shut down. (Because all the worker processes have the same code, and they all should not shut down at the same time.)_

    Our app code should have the code to listen to the signal sent by PM2.

    ```javascript
    // --- THE SHUTDOWN COMMAND LISTENER ---
    process.on('SIGINT', () => {
      console.log(`[Worker ${process.pid}] Received SIGINT shutdown command from PM2!`);

      // 1. Stops accepting NEW 
      // incoming HTTP requests.
      // 'server.close()'
      server.close(async () => {
        console.log(`[Worker ${process.pid}] All active HTTP requests finished. Cleaning up...`);

        try {
          // 2. Safely close database connections 
          // so you don't leak resources.
          await db.connection.close();
          console.log(`[Worker ${process.pid}] Database disconnected. Exiting safely/gracefully.`);
          
          // 3. Tell the OS to terminate 
          // this specific worker process.
          process.exit(0); 
        } catch (err) {
          console.error('Error during cleanup:', err);
          process.exit(1);
        }
      });
    });
    ```

    _The **`kill_timeout`**_:

    _In the `ecosystem.config.js` file, **`kill_timeout: 4000`** says that the worker process has 4 seconds to complete **server.close()** and execute **process.exit(0)**._
    
    _Within 4 seconds if the worker process gracefully shuts down, PM2 immediately moves to signal the Worker 2._

    The `SIGKILL` command

    _But if, while shutting down the Worker 1 is stuck due to any reason, after 4 seconds, PM2 sends a `SIGKILL` signal, which forces the operating system to terminate the process instantly._

2. PM2 waits for Worker 1 to completely restart with the updated code. As soon as the Worker 1 is up, it _(the Worker 1)_ then sends its `ready` signal to PM2.

    _Since we use **`wait_ready: true`**, we need our code to send the `ready` signal to PM2._

    ```javascript
    server.listen(3000, () => {
      console.log('Server successfully bound to port 3000');
      
      // This line triggers the PM2 rolling 
      // reload sequence to proceed to the 
      // next worker
      if (process.send) {
        process.send('ready');
      }
    });
    ```

    _If we don't send `ready` signal via code, PM2 will wait until `listen_timeout` expires before routing traffic to this updated worker, which can delay deployments or cause dropped connections._

3. PM2 directs traffic to the new updated worker instance and THEN ONLY sends the `SIGINT` command to Worker 2, and the process follows untill all the worker processes are restarted with the latest version.

**_This sequential loop ensures that your total server capacity remains high and stable throughout the entire deployment process._**

&nbsp;
## How to Roll Back if Something Goes Wrong

There can be 2 scenarios due to bugs in the code:

1. The new updated app doesnt load properly or crashes while loading.
    
    In this case, PM2 has inbuilt protection. It will never send the `SIGINT` command to the next worker as long as it doesn't recieve the `ready` signal from the currently down worker process.

    This keeps the rest of your cluster completely safe and running your old, working code.
  
2. The new updated app boots up, but you notice logical bugs later on.

    We can roll back using PM2's internal versioning history.

    PM2 keeps a backup state of your processes. To see your deployment history, run:
    ```
    pm2 update
    ```

    To instantly roll back all workers to the exact state they were in before your last reload, run:
    ```
    pm2 rollback my-production-api
    ```
    OR
    Best way would be to revert the code in the git repo and trigger a fresh rolling reload.
    ```
    # 1. Revert your git repository to 
    # the previous working commit
    git checkout HEAD~1

    # 2. Re-install any dependencies 
    # if they changed
    npm install

    # 3. Trigger a fresh, zero-downtime 
    # rolling reload with the old code.
    pm2 reload ecosystem.config.js
    ```
---
&nbsp;


---
&nbsp;
## Monitor worker processes | Logs:

```
pm2 monit
``` 
It displays CPU usage, memory consumption, loop delay, and real-time logs for every worker.

```
pm2 list 

OR

pm2 status
```
Gives a quick snapshot of all workers, showing their status, ID, PID, memory, and restart counts.

```
pm2 show <id>
``` 
Shows script paths, uptime, error log locations, and environment variables.


> ***PM2 Plus (Web Dashboard)*** _for monitoring Memory Leaks_
> ```
> pm2 plus
> ```
> It provides a visual UI to monitor memory leaks, transaction traces, and custom metrics across multiple servers.


***Logs:***
```
pm2 logs
``` 
Gives aggregated live logs from all active workers.

```
pm2 logs <id>
``` 
Isolate and stream logs from a single worker process.

---

&nbsp;
## Monitor worker processes | Memory Leaks
> ***1. We can set up automatic alerts for memory leaks.***
>
> In the `ecosystem.config.js` we add 
> ```
> // Mitigate memory leaks by 
> // auto-restarting at 500 MB
> max_memory_restart: "500M" 
> ```
> _If a worker process develops a memory leak and crosses this limit, PM2 will gracefully restart it._
>
> _If we dont set a max limit, the worker process would crash due to an out-of-memory (OOM) error._
---

> **2. Set Up Webhook Alerts (Slack, Teams)**
>
> To get immediate alerts whenever a crash occurs, or when the memory leak triggers the auto-restart configured above.
>
> Use packages like - `pm2-slack` or `pm2-alert`.
---

&nbsp;
### Some points to remember:

When you first launch PM2, Node.js reads your code files from the disk, compiles them into machine code, and loads them entirely into the server's RAM.

Even if you delete or change the files on the disk using git pull, the old workers _(Workers 1, 2, 3, 4)_ will keep running the old code because they are executing it directly out of memory _(RAM)_.

---
&nbsp;
### Deployment using PM2:

If you are deploying directly to a Virtual Private Server (like AWS EC2 or DigitalOcean), use the `ecosystem.config.js` file.

```javascript
module.exports = {
  apps: [{
    ...
  }],

  // Deployment Configuration
  deploy: {
    production: {
      // SSH user on the server
      user: 'deploy_user',                  
      
      // Prod server IP
      host: ['192.168.1.50'],               
      
      // Git branch to deploy
      ref: 'origin/master',                   
      
      // Your private repo URL
      repo: 'git@github.com:user/repo.git', 
      
      // Target folder on the server
      path: '/var/www/my-production-api',   
      
      // 1. Commands executed on the server 
      // AFTER code is downloaded.
      'post-deploy': 'npm install --production && npm run build && pm2 reload ecosystem.config.js',
    }
  }
};
```

To deploy, either the developer or a Github Runner can execute this command _FROM THEIR LOCAL MACHINE_:
```
pm2 deploy ecosystem.config.js production
```
_PM2 then automatically SSHs into the server, clones the code securely into a fresh isolated timestamped directory, installs fresh dependencies, compiles it, and triggers the zero-downtime rolling reload._

***The trend suggests that we use containerization like Docker and Kubernetes.***

---
&nbsp;
### Scale/Delete

Delete by worker instance by id
```
pm2 delete 0
```

Delete all worker processes of one app:
```
pm2 delete app-name
```

Delete all worker processes of all the apps.
```
pm2 delete all
```

**Instead of deleting processes individually, we can tell PM2 to scale-up or scale-down _manually_.**

```
# Scale down (or up) a specific app to exactly 3 workers
pm2 scale app-name 3
```

---
---

<!-- PAGINATION_START -->

**Parent:** [Node.js](../8.%20Node.js/)
  
**Previous:** ← [Node.js > Cluster](05-cluster.md)  

**Next:** → [Node.js > Worker Threads](./07-worker-threads.md)

<!-- PAGINATION_END -->
