## `let`, `const` & `var` - 4 Differences

### 1. Re-assignment
> `let` and `var` variables can be re-assigned.
>
> `const` variables cannot be re-assigned.

`let` and `var` variables can be re-assigned.
```javascript
let a = 10;
a = 20;

var b = "rahul";
b = "I just got re-assigned";
```

`const` variables cannot be re-assigned.
```javascript
const c = 4.5;
c = false;    // ❌ Incorrect
// 'Uncaught TypeError: Assignment to constant variable'
```

This makes `const` the best choice for declaring variables that don’t need to change. It prevents mistakes such as accidental re-assignment.

However, for objects `const` does allow mutation (NOT re-assignment).
```javascript
// ✅ Mutation is allowed.
const myArr = [];
myArr.push(1);
myArr[9] = 10;      // Mutation is allowed


// ❌ Re-assignment is not allowed for Objects declared with `const`.
myArr = [1, 2, 3];
// 'Uncaught TypeError: Assignment to constant variable'
```
---

&nbsp;
### 2. Scope
> `let` and `const` variables are ***`Block scoped`***.
>
> `var` variables are ***`Function scoped`***.

**`Scope`** refers to the visibility or accessibility of variables, functions and objects within different parts of a program. It determines where in the program a particular variable or a function can be accessed and manipulated.

> A block is any code within curly braces ```{ }```, including functions, loops and conditional statements.

`let` and `const` variables are scoped to the immediate enclosing block denoted by ```{ }``` _(hence the ***`Block scope`***)_.

`var` variables are scoped to the immediate function body `function() {...}` _(hence the ***`Function  scope`***)_.

> Example 1
```javascript
function run() {
  // Function scope
  var foo = "Foo";
  let bar = "Bar";

  console.log(foo, bar);
  // 'Foo Bar'

  {
    // Block scope
    var moo = "Mooo";
    let baz = "Bazz";

    console.log(moo, baz);
    // 'Mooo Bazz'
  }

  console.log(moo);
  // 'Mooo'

  console.log(baz);
  // 'Uncaught ReferenceError: baz is not defined'
}

run();
```

> Example 2
```javascript
var x = "global scope";

function foo() {
  var x = "function scope";
  console.log(x);
}

{
  let x = "block scope";
  // 'x' is only accessible in
  // this enclosing block
}

foo();
// 'function scope'

console.log(x);
// 'global scope'
```

> Example 3: Scope changes when a variable is declared without `let`, `var` or `const` keyword.

In the following code, `b` is not declared using any of the `let`, `const` or `var` keywords and by default becomes `globally scoped`.
```javascript
{
  let a = 9;
  b = 8;  // Becomes globally scoped
}

console.log(a);
// 'ReferenceError: a is not defined'
// ('let' variable is block scoped)

console.log(b);
// '8'
// ('b' is globally scoped)
```

> `Globally scoped` means the variable is accessible by the global object.
>
> In Browser, we can access the variable `b` using the global object - `window`.
>
> ```javascript
> console.log(window.b);
> ```
>
> In Node JS runtime, we can access `b` using `global` object. _(The name itself is `global`)_
>
> ```javascript
> console.log(global.b);
> ```
---

&nbsp;
### 3. Hoisting
> `var` variables are hoisted to the top of their respective scope with the value `undefined` before the code is run.
>
> `let` & `const` variables are hoisted with `uninitialized` value and put in `Temporal Dead Zone` until their initialization is processed.

**`Hoisting`** refers to the behavior of variables and function declarations being moved to the top of their scope.

`var` variables are always hoisted to the top of their respective scope with the value `undefined` before the code is run. They are accessible in their enclosing function scope even before they are declared.

> Example 1: `var` variables are hoisted with value `undefined`.
```javascript
function foo() {
  console.log(x);
  // undefined

  var x = "Rahul";

  console.log(x);
  // 'Rahul'
}

foo();
```

`let` & `const` variables are also hoisted but their value is `uninitialized` and are kept in `Temporal Dead Zone` from the start of the block until their initialization is processed.

> Example 2: `let` variables are `uninitialized` in `Temporal Dead Zone`.
```javascript
function checkHoisting() {
  console.log(x);
  // 'Uncaught ReferenceError: Cannot access 'x' before initialization'

  let x = "Rahul";

  console.log(x);
  console.log(y);
  // 'Uncaught ReferenceError: 'y' is not defined'
}

checkHoisting();
```

> WHY TDZ exist ?
>
> ***To identify the type of issue/bug***
>
> Observe the error message in the Example 2:
>
> `Cannot access 'x' before initialization`
>
> It is because the code is certain that variable `x` is initialized later in the code.
>
> Hence it is kept in `TDZ`. Thus we can identify the issue from error message created by `TDZ` and it makes it easier to avoid errors/bugs which are hard to find.
>
> In case of `var`, we would get:
>
> `'y' is not defined`
>
> which seems to be an identical error in most of other cases, and it becomes difficult to find the actual bug.
>
> Also, another reason why TDZ exists, is to make `const` variables work as intended. i.e. to throw error if `const` variables are not initialized while declaring.
---

&nbsp;
### 4. Creating Global object property
> At the top level, `var` variables create a property on the global object.
>
>`let` and `const` variables do not.

Variables declared using `let` and `const` are not accessible to global objects like the `window` or `global` object.
```javascript
var foo = "Foo";    // globally scoped
let bar = "Bar";    // not globally scoped
baz = "Baz";        // globally scoped

// In browser:
console.log(window.foo);
// 'Foo'
console.log(window.baz);
// 'Baz'
console.log(window.bar);
// undefined

// In Node JS runtime:
console.log(global.foo);
// 'Foo'
console.log(global.baz);
// 'Baz'
console.log(global.bar);
// undefined
```

> The purpose of `let` and `const` statements is only to free up memory when not needed in a certain block.

---
