## `let`, `const` & `var` - Hoisting

> **_`var` variables are hoisted to the top of their respective scope with the value `undefined` before the code is run._**
>
> **_`let` & `const` variables are hoisted `uninitialized` and put in `Temporal Dead Zone` until their initialization is processed._**

_**`Hoisting`** refers to the behavior of variables and function declarations being moved to the top of their scope._

`var` variables are always hoisted to the top of their respective scope with the value `undefined` before the code is run. They are accessible in their enclosing function scope even before they are declared.

> Example 1: `var` variables are hoisted with value `undefined`.
>
> ```javascript
> function foo() {
>   console.log(x);
>   // undefined
>
>   var x = "Rahul";
>
>   console.log(x);
>   // 'Rahul'
> }
>
> foo();
> ```
>

`let` & `const` variables are also hoisted but their value is `uninitialized` and are kept in `Temporal Dead Zone` from the start of the block until their initialization is processed.

&nbsp;

> Example 2: `let` variables are `uninitialized` in `Temporal Dead Zone`.
>
> ```javascript
> function checkHoisting() {
>   console.log(x);
>   // 'Uncaught ReferenceError: Cannot access 'x' before initialization'
>
>   let x = "Rahul";
>
>   console.log(x);
>   console.log(y); // undefined
>
>   var y = 25;
> }
>
> checkHoisting();
> ```

&nbsp;

### **_*Why TDZ exist?*_**

**_To identify the type of issue/bug_**

> _Observe the error message in the 'Example 2'_
>
> `Cannot access 'x' before initialization`
>
> _It is because the code is certain that variable `x` is initialized later in the code and immediately throws a ReferenceError_.

This acts as a safeguard, forcing you to define variables before using them, which prevents logic errors and unpredictable behavior which happens with `var` variables.

Hence it is kept in `TDZ`. Thus we can identify the issue from error message created by `TDZ` and it makes it easier to avoid silent failures and hard-to-track bugs.

> _In the same example, for `var`, we get: `undefined`_
>
> _which seems to be an identical error/scenario in most of other cases, and it becomes difficult to find the actual bug._

Also, another reason why TDZ exists, is to make `const` variables work as intended. i.e. to throw error if `const` variables are not initialized while declaring.

---

---

<!-- PAGINATION_START -->

**Parent:** [1. Basics](../1.%20Basics/)

**Previous:** ← [Differences - Scope](01.3-diff-scope.md)

**Next:** → [Differences - Creating Global object property](01.5-diff-global-object.md)

<!-- PAGINATION_END -->
