## Promises [ES6]

### Promises
Its a powerful and elegant soution to handle asyncrounous code. Also a better way to write Ajax calls is using fetch() function which returns a Promise.

> Example 1: `fetch()` returns a promise.
```javascript
const result = fetch("https://xyz.com/api/somedata");

console.log(result);
// Promise {<pending>}
```

We see that `fetch()` returns a `Promise` and inside curly braces, we see its state - _pending_.

That means it is fetching the data from the url in the background. If we `console.log(result)` after sometime, we may get

```
Promise {<fulfilled> : Response}
```

_(if the request has been completed in the background)_.

&nbsp;

> #### Formal Definition: Promise is an object, used as a placeholder for the future result of an asynchronous operation.

Informal Definition:
A container for a value that will be delivered asynchronously in the future. OR simply "a container/placeholder for a future value".

A perfect example of a future value is response from an AJAX call.

The advantage of this pattern is that we don't need to rely on events and callbacks passed into asynchronous functions to handle asynchronous results.

Instead of nesting callbacks, we can _chain_ the `Promises` for a sequence of asynchronous operations thus escaping the callback hell.

&nbsp;

> Since `Promises` work with asynchronous operations, they are time sensitive. They change their state over time.

Promise Lifecycle

  1. `Pending` _(Before the value is available)_
  2. `Settled` _(When asynchronous task is finished)_
  3. `Fulfilled` _(When the value is available after 'Settled' state)_
  4. `Rejected` _(If an error occur after 'Settled' state)_

We can handle these different states in our code.

> Some terminologies -
>
> "Building a Promise" - We first "Build a Promise" e.g. fetch()
>
> "Consuming a Promise" - We then "Consume a Promise" when we already have a promise returned from Fetch API.

---
