## Execution Context

An Execution Context is an environment where the code executes.

Invoking a function _(function call)_ prompts the engine to generate a new Function Execution Context and push it to the top of the Call Stack.

Its an environment contains information about the code necessary to execute the code.

An Execution Context is an internal data structure/environment where the function executes.

This environment contains all the information necessary to execute the function.

```
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////
//  Execution Context                                //
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////
//                                                   //
//  1. Variable Environment                          //
//         -let, const and var declarations.         //
//         -Functions                                //
//         -'arguments' object -                     //
//           (all arguments passed into the fn.)     //
//  2. Scope Chain -                                 //
//          A reference to variables located outside //
//          of this function.                        //
//  3. 'this' keyword                                //
//                                                   //
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////

```

&nbsp;

> ***IMP: Execution Contexts of ***Arrow Functions*** do not get the `this` keyword and the `arguments` object.***

_However, they can use the `this` and `arguments` from their closest REGULAR parent function's execution context._

---

&nbsp;

## The Scope

> **_Scope refers to the visibility or accessibility of variables, functions, and objects within different parts of a program._**

It determines where in the program a particular variable or function can be accessed and manipulated.

_Simply put : Region of code where a certain variable can be accessed._

Scope is simply an environment in which a certain variable is declared. (Variable Environment in case of functions).

&nbsp;

### Types of Scopes

1. `Global` Scope

2. `Function/Local` Scope

3. `Block` Scope **_[ES6]_**

Prior to ES6, we had `var` which only cared about `global` scope and `function` scope.

**Global Scope:**

- Outside of any Function or Block.
- Variables declared in global scope are accessible anywhere.

**Function(Local) Scope**

- Variables declared in function scope are accessible inside
- the function, NOT OUTSIDE.

**Block Scope [ES 6]**

- Starting from ES6, blocks also create their own scopes.
- Variables accessible ONLY inside the block.
- applicable to only `let` and `const` variables.
- Hence they are called `Block Scoped`.
- Functions are Block Scoped in `strict` mode.

&nbsp;

## The Scope Chain & Variable Lookup

Any function has access to variables from all of its outer scopes.

> ```javascript
> let age = 28;
>
> function parent() {
>   let name = "Rahul";
>
>   function child() {
>     return `Hi ${name}, you are ${age}`;
>     // 'name' and 'age' both are accessible because
>     // they are from their outer scopes.
>   }
> }
> ```
>
> _In the above example:_
>
> _In `child()`, variables `name` and `age` are used but not defined inside `child()`._
>
> _They are looked `up` for in their outer scopes, if found they are used, else we get error. This process is called `variable lookup` in scope chain. _(It forms a chain)\_\_
>
> _So one scope can only look `up` in the scope chain (hence the name `look-up`). `child()`'s scope will only look `up` in it's 'parent' scope._
>
> Variable Lookup Chain: _(Read from Bottom-to-Up)_
>
> _for variable `name` :_
>
> ```
>   Global Scope
>         ^
>         |
>  parent() Scope    found `name`.
>         |          No look-up reqd.
>         |
>   child() Scope    `name` not found.
>                    Let's look up.
>
> ```
>
> _for variable `age`:_
>
> ```
>   Global Scope     found `age`.
>         ^
>         |
>  parent() Scope    `age` not found.
>         |          Let's look up again.
>         |
>   child() Scope    `age` not found.
>                    Let's look up.
>
> ```

&nbsp;

## Scope Chain and Call Stack Relation

**Scope Chain** _defines the order in which functions are written._

**Call Stack** _defines the order in which functions are CALLED._

---

---

<!-- PAGINATION_START -->

**Parent:** [4. How Javascript Works](..)  
**Previous:** [Execution Context](04.1-execution-context.md)  
**Next:** [`this` Keyword](05-this-keyword.md)

<!-- PAGINATION_END -->
