## Event Loop

> **_A mechanism that orchestrates or coordinates the execution of synchronous and asynchronous code in Node js._**

It runs continuously as long as your Node.js application is up and running, handling multiple operations executing concurrently.

It takes a callback function from a callback queue and puts in Call Stack for execution.

A non blocking concurrency model is achieved using this.

_\*Event Loop uses event emitters and event multiplexers behind the scenes to make this happen._

&nbsp;

## Libuv Library

In Node.js runtime, apart from C++ Bindings and Thread Pool, there is one crucial component called `Libuv` library.

It is a code(library) written in C that is responsible for handling asynchronous methods.

Libuv uses different POSIX threads to perform asynchronous tasks and adds their callbacks to respective queues.

There are 6 queues in Node.js runtime:

- **_`Microtask` Queue_** - _This queue contains two different queues:_
  - _`nextTick Queue` - holds the callbacks of the ***process.nextTick()***_
  - _`Promise Queue` - holds the callbacks of ***Promises***._

- **_`Timer` Queue_**<sup>+</sup> - _holds the callbacks of timer functions i.e. ***setTimeout()*** and ***setInterval()***._

- **_`I/O` Queue_**<sup>+</sup> - _holds the callbacks of all the async methods such as those of ***fs***, ***http*** modules etc._

- **_`Check/Immediate` Queue_**<sup>+</sup> - _holds the callbacks of ***setImmediate()***._

- **_`Close` Queue_**<sup>+</sup> - _holds the callbacks of the ***close*** event of an async task._

> _<sup>+</sup>The `Timer`, `I/O`, `Check`, and `Close` queues are all part of `Libuv` library. They are also called the **`macrotask`** queues._

> _The two _`microtask queues`_, however, are a part of Node.js._

---

&nbsp;

## Order of execution of callbacks of different queues

1. First, the callbacks _(tasks)_ in the **_nextTick_** queue are executed and only then, the tasks in the **_promise_** queue are executed.

   But there is a catch -

   After finishing executing the **_nextTick_** queue, before moving to **_promise_** queue, the **_nextTick_** queue is again checked for any callbacks.

   > _For a case when a ***nextTick()*** callback registers another ***nextTick()*** callback, that will also get added to the ***nextTick*** queue at the end._
   >
   > _So those are also executed before moving to the ***promise*** queue._
   >
   > ```javascript
   > process.nextTick(() => {
   >   console.log("Next Tick 1");
   >   process.nextTick(() => {
   >     console.log("Next Tick 2");
   >   });
   > });
   >
   > Promise.resolve().then(() => {
   >   console.log("Promise 1");
   > });
   >
   > // Output:
   > // Next Tick 1
   > // Next Tick 2
   > // Promise 1
   > ```

---

2. One callback from the **_timer_** queue is executed. **_timer_** queue contains the expired timer callbacks waiting to be executed.

   The timer callbacks are not executed all at once.

   After every callback is executed in the **_timer_** queue, event loop checks and executes the callbacks from the **_microtask_** queue again _(first ***nextTick*** and then the ***promise*** queue)_.

---

3. All callbacks within the **_I/O_** queue are executed all at once.

   Also, there is something called _`I/O polling`_.

   It _checks/polls_ if the _I/O operation_ has completed or not.

   _e.g. reading a file, waiting for a http response etc._

   So it might happen that when the loop checks the **_I/O_** queue it is empty and the the callbacks of the other queues get called.

---

4. Again, the **_microtask_** queue is checked for any callbacks in them and executed. _(first ***nextTick*** and then the ***promise*** queue)_.

---

5. One callbacks from the **_check(Immediate)_** queue is executed.

   Similar to timer callbacks, the check callbacks are not executed all at once.

   After every callback is executed in the **_check_** queue, event loop checks and executes the callbacks from the **_microtask_** queue again _(first ***nextTick*** and then the ***promise*** queue)_.

---

6. Again, the **_microtask_** queue is checked for any callbacks in them and executed. _(first ***nextTick*** and then the ***promise*** queue)_.

---

7. All callbacks in the **_close_** queue are executed AT ONCE.

   e.g. _`readableStream.on("close", cb);`_

---

8. Again, for the last time the **_microtask_** queue is checked for any callbacks in them and executed. _(first ***nextTick*** and then the ***promise*** queue)_.

---

&nbsp;

That's how ONE event loop 'tick' completes. And this process continues.

The promises' callbacks are called `microtasks`, hence their queue is called so.

&nbsp;

_Also, Timer functions do not always gaurantee the passed delay execution. because there might be other callback function waiting to be executed before the timer in the Callback Queue._

_May be it can happen, that if there are many mirotasks in their queue, then callbacks from callback queue may never get executed or get executed with huge delay._

---

---

<!-- PAGINATION_START -->

**Parent:** [4. How Javascript Works](../4.%20How%20Javascript%20Works/)  

**Previous:** ← [Primitive vs Object References](08-primitive-vs-objects.md)  

**Next:** → [Event Loop Exercises](09.2-event-loop-exercises.md)

<!-- PAGINATION_END -->
